---
title: "The Role of Atemi for Uke"
layout: post
tags: aikido atemi uke
---

What's the role of <span class="aikido-term">atemi</span> anyways? I've always thought that it's about giving the <span class="aikido-term">nage</span> more time by distracting <span class="aikido-term">uke</span> and creating a situation where blending can continue. Thus the <span class="aikido-term">atemi</span> shouldn't stop <span class="aikido-term">uke</span>, just redirect the attacking strike or move <span class="aikido-term">uke</span> to a position where off-balancing can take place. <span class="aikido-term">Atemi</span> doesn't really even make contact with <span class="aikido-term">atemi</span> points and is usually slow enough for <span class="aikido-term">uke</span> to see in time. This way uke has a chance to dodge either by moving their body or changing the attacking strike into a block.
 
To achieve this effect, <span class="aikido-term">uke</span> cannot know that the <span class="aikido-term">atemi</span> is not intended as a counter-attack. They have to think that, for example, the <span class="aikido-term">nukite</span> will strike their [trachea](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vertebrate_trachea) and cause damage. They have be be afraid of the <span class="aikido-term">atemi</span> and act accordingly.
 
Too often even the yudansha forget this in day to day practice. Take <span class="aikido-term">yokomen-uchi</span> attack for example. No matter if the entry is <span class="aikido-term">irimi</span> or <span class="aikido-term">tenshin</span> form, both entries contain an <span class="aikido-term">atemi</span>. It's not uncommon that when you make an open handed reach for <span class="aikido-term">uke</span>'s face, they just stand there, not react in any way. They know that this is aikido, we don't hit people. <span class="aikido-term">Atemi</span> is just a threat. <span class="aikido-term">Atemi</span> in aikido is void. I disagree. The role of <span class="aikido-term">uke</span> is to attack and keep attacking until they cannot. Thus they have to dodge counter-strikes, always be aware where <span class="aikido-term">nage</span> is, look for openings in <span class="aikido-term">nage</span>'s technique and continue with additional attacks. If <span class="aikido-term">uke</span> doesn't react to the <span class="aikido-term">atemi</span> in <span class="aikido-term">nage</span>'s entry, this basically signals that they've lost their will to attack and <span class="aikido-term">nage</span> really has no need to execute a technique. <span class="aikido-term">Uke</span> should always remember that they don't know what will happen, they should always think of every <span class="aikido-term">atemi</span> as a blow that could permanently injure them.
 
Some people have commented that is look silly that whenever someone strikes an <span class="aikido-term">atemi</span> towards my face, I pull my head back, move my body to dodge, even close my eyes. I don't do this because I want to perform demonstration aikido and want the <span class="aikido-term">nage</span>'s technique to look good. It's because I strive to forget that the other person will not hurt me. I moved in to hurt the <span class="aikido-term">nage</span> by trying to strike them, and I expect them to do the same for me. I try to dodge the counter-strike and search for a position from where I can launch my counter-counter-attack. It may look silly, but in the mind of the <span class="aikido-term">uke</span>, the only thing that matters is who throws the last punch.


